Hi, my name's Don Letts.
I make films, I DJ, I have a show on BBC Six Music.
And I'm here today to look through the window into John Peel's world,
and unlock one of the many stories suggested by his amazing record collection.
Today's chapter is: A Punky Reggae Party.
"Leader of the human race,
don't judge me by the colour of my face,
whether I'm black or white,
let's all unite".
Well, I've had the great pleasure of rummaging through John Peel's record collection.
With a view to telling the story of A Punky Reggae Party,
and kind of my story as well.
And it's been a trip. It's kind of overwhelming.
I mean it's obviously vinyl heaven.
And I pulled this out: King Stitt 'Herbsman's Shuffle'.
Ah, here's a Reggae classic, a favourite of my Dad's,
and Joe Strummer's actually.
You know it's funny, my Dad used to have a soundsystem,
and it used to be called 'Duke Letts Superstonic Sound'.
It's not like a soundsystem that you have nowadays, with one red lightbulb
and people with a bag of weed.
It was more astere, and they'd be more likely to be carrying bibles.
Cause they were like these collective affairs that people would go too after Sunday church.
Y'know where they'd kind of share their experiences and ease the pain of grafting all week.
And playing records too each other was a way of staying...
...not only in touch with each other, but staying in touch with what was going on back home.
And back home, they were listening to sounds like this from King Stitt.
Let's have a listen.
Man this is gonna take me back.
"No matter what the people say,
these sounds lead the way,
It's daughter of the day, from boss DJ,
I King Stitt, shout it from the top
to the very last drop".
I remember every word, damn.
Right.
Got a bit of soul,
got a bit of rock, bit of reggae:
beginnings of Don Letts.
I grew up listening to both black and white music,
and my taste kind of reflects the duality of my existence.
So at home I'm listening to stuff like early Toots,
and early U-Roy and I-Roy.
But at the same time I'm listening to the alternative music,
such as it was then,
through stations like Radio Luxembourg.
I'm listening to things like The Stones, The Who, The Faces, The Yarbirds.
And other records like, I pulled this out actually as well.
A bit of an odd one, this is a group called The Idle Race.
Probably wouldn't have heard of them, but thats what was interesting about Luxembourg,
It wasn't just playing The Beatles and The Stones and all that stuff,
It was also playing odd things like this.
Y'know I guess my musical taste was kind of dictated by the fact that not only was I listening to Jamaican music,
but I was listening to popular white music at the time.
And that was really kind of compounded by going to school in South London...
...called Archbishop Tennisons, Grammar school, it was smart.
By that time I was listening to a lot of things that my white mates were listening too.
One particular thing I remember is that one day we were in the playground,
and this rumour starts going round the school that some band are gonna be playing at a place called the Young Vic in South London.
No one knew who the band was, but nevertheless, after school, we all went in our school uniforms.
Turns out it's The Who, doing a full production rehearsal.
That means y'know, it wasn't like rehearsing, they're doing a full on show,
in front of a cast of thousands.
There's the lazers and the lights and everything.
And I was 15 feet away from the band, including Keith Moon.
And I'll tell you, after that, my whole life changed, fucked me up totally.
From that day on I became a rebel, 'Who's Next', a great British record.
So I'm getting Led Zeppelin, and Cream, and Nice and Captain Beefheart at school,
and stuff coming in from America, stuff like this:
James Brown, 'Say it Loud: I'm Black and I'm Proud'.
A tremendously empowering record for me because,
you've got to understand, I say Black and British, it kind of rolls off the tounge now.
Back then it was a very confusing concept, it was like a weird social experiment.
And it was about the same time that Enoch Powell had made his 'Rivers of Blood' speech.
Racism and all this situation got very polarised.
When I played this I was empowered, I was tooled up.
Before Punk Rock, people forget that what a lot of white kids and black kids were listening to up and down the country,
before Punk exploded, was Soul which a lot people think was all smooth and groovy dancefloor stuff,
but there was also people like Funkadelic, who I'm trying to find at the moment.
They were somewhere else man. It was mindblowing.
Hold up...mindblowing, how appropriate.
'Free Your Mind and Your Arse Will Follow'. This record is incredible.
When me and the brothers heard this, it floored us.
Because everyone else was doing the sort of the Motown, the suits, the slicked hair, the fancy dance moves.
These guys were taking acid, they were totally fucked up.
And it was politicised as well, it wasn't like they were just jamming and being crazy.
This is definitely going in my box.
By the mid Seventies, you had massive unemployment, there were three day weeks,
there was a lot of strikes, rubbish piled up everywhere because the bin men weren't collecting the rubbish.
And again, the rise of the National Front, which was always looming in the background.
And I'd left school, and got myself a job in this place called Acme Attractions on Kings Road, Chelsea.
It was all kind of retro clothing, mohair jumpers, jelly shoes, peg leg trousers,
and jukeboxes. And in that shop, my soundtrack was Hardcore Dub Reggae.
I was playing what I like, which again by this point had become very militant and politicised,
again informed by what was going on in america, with the whole Civil Rights thing.
Ah, Johnny Rotten's favourite record: Doctor Alimantado's 'Born for a Purpose'.
Before the advent of Bob Marley, Rasta's were kind of frowned upon in Jamaica.
And this is a true story of Doctor Alimantado being purposefully run over by a bus driver.
But he survived, hence the title 'Born for a Purpose'.
Classic lyrics: 'If you feel like you have no reason for living, don't determine my life'.
And that's what it was about, writing our own soundtrack.
And like I said, I had mine, with the Reggae thing, but my white mates didn't have a soundtrack,
so they were looking for something that felt relevant to their own situation.
And a lot of that, funnily enough, would initially come from America.
The Ramones. This is the record that Sid Vicious stayed up all night listening too.
And in the morning, he could play bass. Kind of.
Such a different sound to the popular music of the time.
The ELO's and The Eagle's and all the rest of it.
You can see why this captured the imagination of my white mates.
So, Acme Attractions is bubbling, the Punk Rock scene is starting to come together,
starting to gain a bit of press and a bit of notority
spearheaded of course, by the formation of The Pistols.
There's a vibe building, with band's starting to form, but they've got nowhere to play.
So the accountant for Acme Attractions, a guy called Andrew Czezowski
decided to create the first dedicated live Punk Rock venue.
It was called The Roxy, in Covent Garden, which used to be an old gay club.
And because of the reaction that he saw to the records that I was playing in the shop
he asked me to have a go at djing,
I'd never Dj'd in my bloody life, but I thought I'd have a go.
Now, this is all so new in the Punk Rock scene, that there weren't any Punk records to play.
What's Don Letts gonna do? I continued playing my Hardcore Dub Reggae records and lucky for me,
the Punks loved it.
Augustus Pablo's 'King Tubby Meets the Rockers Uptown'.
King Tubby, along with Lee Perry, really pioneered the whole advent of dub music.
Which was really born of studio technique.
You know their talent was to push the bass centre stage, and use the mixing desk as an instrument in itself.
And echo, echo comes in big time.
I think that attracted people because it left room in the mix for you to put yourself in the music.
It kind of soundtracked whatever thoughts were going on inside your head.
And the Punks really picked up on that.
So I'm playing all these kind of Dub Reggae records.
And it found a natural home with the Punks,
because like I say, there was a history of white people listening to Jamaican music,
that predated the punk movement.
Y'know truth be told, before Don Letts and the Punky Reggae Party
there was a whole movement of the Skinheads, that were like the fashion version not the facist version
that were listening to the Trojan catalogue.
And they were hip to Jamaican music
There's a lot made of me starting The Punky Reggae party, but the truth of the matter is
white working class people were already listening to Jamaican music.
I think the people that I turned onto Reggae, were the people that didn't grow up living next to black people.
Back in the mid seventies, that was a lot of people.
So there I am ensconced in the rock scene, playing these records inbetween these fast and furious live sets.
The Clash opened it on January the 1st 1977,
but after them, everybody who was anybody, besides The Pistols in the Punk scene played there.
Regulars were The Damned, who famously had the first punk record, 'New Road'.
Great record, I've never been a great Damned fan, but I'll tell you what,
they rocked the crowd.
And there were The Jam, we had The Slits, The Buzzcocks, Subway Set, Siouxsie and the Banshees,
lunatics like Johnny Moped, and the list goes on.
I mean like I said, everybody who was anybody played at the Roxy.
So, Punk Rockers have got a place to play,
and now they've got a band championing their sound, because in this cultural climate the Sex Pistols are formed.
On the back of the The Sex Pistols, you had The Clash.
The Pistols burst on the scene and it was like a carrying call, a call to arms.
A cultural ground zero.
All of a sudden my white mates now had a soundtrack that was...
...of the people, for the people, by the people, and that was about things that were affecting them on a day to day basis.
This group and this record, is what kickstarted the whole Punk Rock thing in the UK.
A test pressing of 'Anarchy in The UK'.
The record that kickstarted the whole thing.
You know, what's funny about this shit is everybody said The Pistols couldn't play,
but that there it's all in place, everything's happening,
the bass, the guitar, the drums, John's vocals,
I mean what the hell, that was a rocking record man.
The interesting thing about The Roxy is it's become this legendary mythological thing, you know it was only open three months.
Literally, January the 1st 1977 to whatever was three months was later.
And it's interesting because after the club finished at night, every night in fact.
Many of the major players in the Punk Rock scene, would get in my car and a few other cars
and drive to my place in Forest Hill where I lived with all my Rasta bredrin.
The party would continue through the night.
What I came to realise is that, not only were they interested in listening to my Reggae collection,
but by this time I'm starting to do the Punk Rock thing with the super eight camera
and I'm projecting the images on the wall in my living room.
Of course I realised what they were really doing was checking out how they were coming across,
they were checking out their presence, their image.
And with a view to really thinking about where they were going,
because you know they didn't wanna be just screaming kids that were stamping their feet.
That was just a starting point, you know they had aspirations;
to kind of be able to play their instruments,
and to be part of this kind of lineage of rock and roll man.
They wanted to bring something to the table, and they wanted to pass on the energy that had inspired them.
And in fact, after The Pistols did that thing on the Bill Grundy show,
which basicially turned into a sort of fuck you session, sorry for the language.
That was broadcast nationally across the UK, and the next day everybody thought that's what Punk was about.
And to my mind it created what I called a tabloid Punk, you know binliners and spiky hair.
Literally the very next day, all the smarter and the more intellectual people dissociated themselves.
From that first incarnation of what they called Punk.
And not long after that, to my mind the whole thing got a lot more interesting.
And eventually became the Post-Punk scene.
And The Slits to me, were sort of the beginning of the Post-Punk movement.
Where people kind of freed themselves up from the shackles of what Punk had become.
It's funny though, once give yourself a label, that's all you can be.
Ah, The Slits, one of my favourite Punk Rock groups.
And they really continued the DIY ethic because people wanted to get flash producers and things like that,
and they didn't want any of that, they actually got in one of my friends called Dennis Bovell to produce this album.
And, they were one of the last Punk bands to be signed, they were so out there.
I mean they terrified men, they terrified record companies.
And this record, I think is a work of genius.
And a great inspiration to women up and down the country.
Not only only The Slits on stage, they were The Slits offstage as well, it wasn't an act.
It was inherent of who they were.
It was very feminist without them saying it was feminist you know.
They didn't a manifesto, it was just who they were.
And musically, they'd gone way beyond the fast and furious guitars,
and they were bringing in Reggae, African rhythms, a bit of Avant Garde Jazz.
Oh look, I've got a credit on the back of this, shit I forgot that.
Ahh. They're dearly missed.
In '77 Bob Marley was living in the UK, just around the corner from my shop actually on Oakley Street.
He'd been shot actually, in Jamaica, and had kind of relocated to the UK.
And we became friends because of our mutual love of a particular plant,
and one day I went round to his place, to collect some money he owed me.
And I'm wearing my bondage trousers, and Bob, he'd been reading the tabloid press too.
And had picked up on all this negative aspect of what punk was about, or what he thought it was about.
And he saw me in my bondage trousers, and he's like Don Letts, 'What we dealing with?'
'You look like one of them nasty blud clart Punk Rockers'.
And I'm like 'Scuse me Bob, we're in English'
And he's like 'Don Letts, what you dealing with, you look like a nasty punk rocker.
And I'm like 'Hold on a minute Bob, you've got it wrong, these are my friends you're talking about'.
And I basically had to stand my ground.
And I wasn't like, the big Don Letts you see now,
I was like a baby dread, but I had to stand my ground and defend my mates.
And basically I said 'Look Bob, you're wrong, these are likeminded rebels and there is something going on here'.
And he told me to bugger off, so I left with my tail between my legs.
Three months later, after he'd become a lot more familiar with the scene,
he was moved to write this tune.
Which I found in Mr Peel's collection, a white label of Punky Reggae party.
I got the last laugh Bob.
Respect.